Today we head out onto the runway and
take a close look at whether the new
runway gen 4.5 image to video model can
actually deliver strong performance. In
part one of this runway series, we start
with a highlight feature motion sketch.
Part one, the starting image. A few days
ago, I already published a tutorial on
Runway Gen 4.5, but that one focused
purely on text to video since most
people are actually using image to
video. This update is an important step
toward what users really need. Before we
can properly test the runway motion
sketch feature, we first need a solid
starting image that allows us to explore
different scenarios. Runway offers its
own image model Gen 4 on the platform
costing 8 credits per image with Nano
Banana Pro as an alternative at 20
credits per image. Other options include
Nano Banana Pro via Google Flow
Midjourney or Image01 for those coming
more from the cling side. This master
image follows very clear rules and the
same applies to the prompt which you can
find in the pinned comment. Google,
Clling, Runway, and Midjourney all
interpret this setup quite differently.
If you break the image into layers, the
first layer in the foreground is a small
group of people. Directly behind them
sits a hand cart they can interact with.
The next layer on the left is a tavern
with strong interaction potential, while
the final layer on the right opens into
a wide landscape. I have to admit, the
runway image model surprised me in a
very positive way. For this first test,
I deliberately chose an external source
using the result from Nano Banana Pro.
One important note here, unlike usual,
I'm working with just a single image
this time so we can better evaluate the
actual influence of the motion sketch
feature. Part two, the motion sketch
feature. In the next step, we get
familiar with the requirements and the
costs. To begin, click app in the left
navigation and then select motion
sketch. Draw motion path under explore
gen 4.5.
Alternatively, you can click motion
sketch in the teaser on the right and
then on the video below. The image you
see on the left shows the basic
principle. You simply sketch or write
something directly into the image which
the runway AI then attempts to translate
into a corresponding video. A proper
text prompt is not possible here. Also
pay attention to the costs shown in the
lower left corner where you can again
see which AI models are being used. To
start clean, first click the reset icon
in the top right to remove any existing
presets. As you can see, you can prepare
the required annotations in advance. For
example, using Photoshop or add them
later directly in runway via the sketch
function. I will show both examples.
Open an image editing tool and sketch
into the image what you want to happen.
Save that image and upload it to the
runway interface.
Alternatively, upload the unedited image
directly into Runway and add your
instructions afterward using sketch
mode. Part three, the motion sketch
editor. The motion sketch editor offers
a few basic editing modes. On the far
left, you have the color selection.
Using the grab icon, you can easily move
previously placed paths, shapes, and
text so they line up exactly where you
want them. You can also click on any
input and delete it using the delete
key. If you prefer drawing, use draw
paths. If you want to mark larger areas,
draw shapes is the better option. The
right label icon allows you to place
text directly into the image, which
effectively replaces a traditional text
prompt. One question is hard to ignore
here, though. White is currently the
only available color for these overlay
elements. If your image already contains
a lot of white areas, those annotations
can become very hard to see. The undo
and redo functions are self-explanatory,
letting you step backward or forward
through your edits. When you want to use
the annotated image for video
generation, do not press the X in the
top right. Instead, use export sketch in
the bottom right. Only then will runway
store the edited version of the image in
the interface. If you click the X,
everything is gone and you have to start
over. We already know the starting
image. To test different scenarios, I
prepared several versions of the image
in Photoshop with specific visual
instructions. The goal here is to see
how precisely the runway AI follows
these sketched inputs.
In example one, we start very simple. I
placed a frame over the window and added
the instruction crash zoom inside the
house. As you can see, the result is
actually quite solid. However, a
weakness of this feature already becomes
visible. Take a look at the left side of
the building. You will notice that this
part of the tavern changes its
appearance from run to run. So far, this
was purely a camera move. In example
two, we slightly increased the
difficulty by introducing interaction.
Here I circled both people in red and
added the instruction both people shake
hands and laugh. Again, pay close
attention to the left side of the
building. The handshake itself is
handled reasonably well. Although Runway
clearly forces an unnecessary movement
onto the characters.
In its interface, Runway promotes a very
specific motion rhythm. First a crash
zoom on the left person, then a whip pan
to the right person. In example three, I
try to replicate exactly that behavior.
What looks surprisingly good in Runway's
promo material simply does not work
here, even after multiple attempts. The
man walks past the camera on the left.
The camera keeps turning and suddenly a
completely different woman appears. I
initially assumed this was caused by my
Photoshop prepared images, but the same
result occurs when using sketches
created directly in the motion sketch
editor.
Example four adds more dynamics. The
sketch instructs a white horse to enter
the frame from the left followed by a
dolly camera move. What actually happens
is this. Wherever the horse originates
from, it appears to come from the center
of the image and then runs to the right.
Visually, the result is quite nice, but
it does not match the motion sketch
input.
The challenge increases further. In
example five, here the scenario
introduces an external threat entering
the scene from the right intended to
drive the behavior of the two
characters. The motion sketch
instructions were, "A group of armored
soldiers enters from the right, and
people run to the left, supported by
colored markings. I could not help but
laugh when a group of cheerful figures
with wooden sticks ran across the image,
conceptually correct, visually
questionable.
Example six introduces a much higher
level of complexity, essentially
requiring a causal chain of actions.
First, he walks to the wooden cart,
picks up the rope, turns toward the
woman, and throws the rope in her
direction. Second, the woman turns
toward the man and catches the rope.
Once again, runway shows a strong
tendency to force motion. The sequence
starts promising but quickly breaks
down. Repeated attempts do not improve
the outcome. In example seven, I use
three different colors to define a clear
sequence of actions, similar to
timestamp prompting. Step one, the door
of the building opens and a man slowly
steps outside. Step two, the woman turns
toward the building. Step three, the man
laughs. If you look closely, runway does
follow this order, but the forced motion
returns once again. And yes, take
another look at the left side of the
building. Example 8 is a deliberate
stylistic break. Anyone familiar with my
other tutorials knows that I have a soft
spot for massive combine harvesters and
desert vehicles. The instruction in
short was that an armored desert hauler
emerges from behind the building, stops
next to the people, and a raccoon steps
out. The result is frankly unusable. The
vehicle drives straight through the door
and the raccoon's appearance is anything
but convincing. What I do like, however,
is the vehicle itself, especially the
dust, weight, and sense of motion. A
quick look at the technical parameters.
All videos created with motion sketch
are 5 seconds long and have a resolution
of 1,280x
720 pixels. If you are happy with the
result, you can press the three dot icon
directly below the video and select
upscale from the drop- down menu. In
this example here, which you can see on
the right, the video resolution
increases to 4,96x234
pixels. The technical side of this
process is handled by the Topaz AI
upscaler. A small side note here, if you
already own the Topaz AI bundle,
including Video AI, Astra, Gigapixel,
and others, you can fine-tune this
entire process locally on your computer
and are not limited to Runway's default
settings. At this point, I want to raise
a question that will probably interest
users. Is there some kind of
professional mode in Runway that I am
missing? Or are these results meant to
be used mainly as videotovideo source
material? Or do you basically need an
external upscaler like Topaz Astra to
remove the clearly visible morphing and
stuttering? Runway does include a
built-in Topaz AI upscaler. That much is
clear. It scales the videos up and costs
10 credits, but the overall results
still fall short of the expectations
Runway sets for itself. I listened
closely to the official promo trailer
and compared it with what I am actually
seeing on screen. When Runway says,
"Take any image, real, generated,
iconic, sketched, scribbled, rendered,
or illustrated and bring it to life in
any way you want. I think users can
reasonably expect the AI to understand
objects in the scene. Characters should
not simply walk through each other. that
could suggest that collision handling is
either limited or not reliably applied.
Camera movements are often interpreted
differently than instructed. Objects
suddenly appear out of nowhere. Vehicle
behavior sometimes lacks basic physical
plausibility. For example, a heavily
armored vehicle balancing on just two
wheels without instantly tipping over.
Color consistency can be an issue, and
colored action markers from the sketch
editor sometimes remain visible in the
final video. But the biggest issue by
far is morphing. A clip can look
promising overall, but if a simple
handshake turns into a single melted
mass of hands and skin that breaks the
illusion immediately, as many of you
already know, I am not a one-shot and
done type. I test and then I test again.
For this tutorial, I burned through a
massive number of credits. Worth
mentioning once more, but it cannot be
the expectation that you have to
generate the same clip 10 times just to
maybe get a version with less morphing.
And if even the showcase examples
prominently featured on the website do
not reliably work, that does raise some
serious questions, at least when it
comes to motion sketch. You do have to
give Runway some credit in this regard.
They clearly state that every generation
consumes credits regardless of the
outcome, that unsatisfactory results are
not eligible for refunds, and that
iteration and experimentation are an
expected part of working with generative
video. This single example shows how a
still image can be transformed into a
video of your choice using sketch-like
inputs. In the next tutorial, we will
look at runway character swap and pure
image to video using presets and custom
creative ideas. So, there is more to
come. There is one more thing I want to
mention here. When I asked the Runway AI
for help with motion sketch, I received
a very cheerful response saying that
motion sketch was not currently
available as a standalone tool in
Runway. A simple screenshot then made it
clear that the motion sketch feature was
in fact already available. I followed up
by asking whether there was any
documentation offering tips for motion
sketch. That question was answered just
as confidently with the message that
since this is a new tool, experimenting
is often the best way to understand how
it works. Fair enough, but the actual
level of insight gained from that answer
was limited and mostly amusing. I am
confident that the runway team will
update and expand their guidance over
time. For anyone who wants to dig
deeper, the Runway help center already
offers a solid collection of
information, including details on Gen
4.5, prompting, shot sizes, and framing,
camera angles, composition techniques,
camera movements, and focus techniques.
That part is genuinely well done. That's
it for this tutorial. I hope you enjoyed
it. Thank you very much for listening.
See you soon. your channel AI. Now you
know